(upbeat music)
- Hello and welcome to another episode
of No Such Thing as a Fish,
a weekly podcast coming to you
from the QI offices in Hoburn.
My name is Dan Schreiber.
I am sitting here with Anna Tyshinski,
James Harkin and John Lloyd.
And once again, we have gathered around the microphones
with our four favorite facts from the last seven days
and in no particular order, here we go.
Starting with fact number one, and that is Johnny.
- My fact is, when the impressionist Claude Monet
lived at Giverny, he had six gardeners,
one of whose whole job was to dust and wash the water lilies
and clean the surface of the water.
- Wow, I guess if you're famous for painting water lilies,
you want them to look as good as possible, don't you?
It makes sense.
- Yeah, exactly.
They need to be picturesque.
- Although maybe you wouldn't paint
the bits of dust on them anyway, would you?
How do you dust a water lily?
- What are you using for that, a Hoover?
- I think you just wet it, right?
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
But these were very special water lilies.
They were specially imported from Japan.
Monet was crazy about Japanese art,
which you probably know had just arrived in France
when Japan opened up in the 1850s to the West.
All these prints started arriving
and all the impressionists were crazy about them.
And Monet got a real bargain.
In Zandarm, he was in Holland for a bit.
And there was a porcelain dealer
who didn't know that these Japanese prints
were going to come from World Finance
and he wrapped all his china in them.
And so Monet bought some cheap china
with these amazing prints by Hokusai
and Hiroshige and all that.
- Oh, wow, cool.
- And I'm wearing the Hokusai jumper today.
- Oh, wow.
- So you are.
- Is that deliberate?
- No.
- So Hokusai is famous for this wave painting.
People will know it.
Well, it's on my jumper and it's around.
And it comes from a set of paintings called,
I think it's called 36 Views of Mount Fuji.
But there's actually 46 Views of Mount Fuji in that set
because he did 36 and they were so popular.
He did another 10, but he didn't change the name.
- That's great.
- Too much effort.
Did he run out of energy just to the end?
- That's interesting.
Monet also was famous for doing lots of paintings
of the same thing, not just Waterloo's.
Steam trains he did, poplars.
Haystacks was very popular.
Same with Cézanne, who was a great mate of Monet's.
And Cézanne painted Molson Victoire, I think 200 times
and never felt he got it quite right.
It was an extraordinary life
because he struggled hugely with poverty
and depression all his life.
But by the time we were talking about the Waterloo's,
he'd suddenly got rich.
I think the thing that really kicked it off
was the heiress to the singer-sewing machine fortune.
I think her name was something like Waynetta,
something like what?
- Waynetta Slop.
- Waynetta singer, what was she called?
Winaretta Singer, she was called.
- Wow.
- And she came to see Monet in 1886
and she loved his stuff and bought a painting.
And suddenly the whole place is full of Americans
coming to see him.
- It was Americans, wasn't it?
It was American money that came in.
And is it Cassat?
Marie Cassat, who was one of the impressionists.
And she was arguably the most important one
because she was the one who got all the Americans
really interested in it.
And then the Americans started buying all this stuff
and then the impressionists just had loads of money
and could do what they wanted.
- Yeah, I found a real offensive
because I actually been to Zandarm.
In fact, I bought a boat in Zandarm
and I rode it there for a year.
- An every man kind of story.
(all laughing)
- 'Cause I often quote Monet, who had this great line,
"After 20 years, the wall is still there,"
by which he meant to do things really well.
You've got to get the other side of this block
into the zone, into the settlement.
And I often quote that as something that I feel very upset.
But this is a guy who, age 28,
he threw himself into the sain
and attempted to drown himself.
- Yes, why, what was his plan there?
Because it was unsuccessful, of course.
And if you can swim, I think it is quite hard.
- Well, that was the problem.
He jumped in and then regretted it and made it.
And remember, he was an incredibly good swimmer.
- All right, to the shore.
- It's currents, currents take you under
and stop you from getting back up.
- I know, but you've got to pick your bit.
Like, if you can swim,
and I think it's quite hard to just not move your body.
- In order to paint a water lily,
you need to be a water lily.
- Right.
- Perhaps that's what was going on there.
- He was that committed.
He was, that's really interesting
that you say you identify with him, John.
'Cause he kind of reminded me of you as I was reading this,
because as you say, he was such a perfectionist
and obsessive and did seem to have this conviction
he wasn't doing well enough.
He had another quote that was,
"My life has been nothing but a failure
"and all that's left for me to do
"is to destroy my paintings before I disappear."
- Oh, yeah, that's you, John.
(all laughing)
- He did, he destroyed 500 of his paintings.
- Wow. - In 1908,
they had to cancel an exhibition
'cause he'd slashed 15 of the paintings with a knife.
- Must have been seriously annoying
for the gallery curators.
- But this is worrying, Hannah, because--
- I took my halfway through that theory.
I was like, "Why have I said this to my boss?"
But go on. (all laughing)
- John, no, no, don't go down to the tent
to throw yourself in, for God's sake.
- Have you read Steve Jobs's biography by Walter--
- Walter Isaacson? - Yes.
It's a searing book about this terribly complicated
and really sort of mad person.
And I suddenly thought Jobs's perfection's a bit like me,
and I came back and I said to a friend,
"Have you read the Steve Jobs bio?"
And he said, "Yes."
I said, "Do you think I'm a bit like Steve Jobs?"
And he went, "Um..."
(all laughing)
- You did genuinely go through a period
of wearing polo-neck shirts.
Was that after that biography?
- Oh, yeah. - No, I've always worn them.
Have you, I guess. - He got it from you,
didn't he? - He's a navy thing, yeah.
- Oh, yeah. - All right.
The thing about the number,
the volume of paintings that he did, back to Monet,
there's accounts of where he'd be painting a scene
and almost like filming a movie where your lighting changes
and that's it for the day.
He'd go, "Get me another canvas."
And they might bring another canvas
that he was painting yesterday at that exact time,
so then he could continue on that.
So he was constantly swapping in and out canvases
of work and progress.
- And he also used, because he had so many children,
because a very complicated private life
is not sure you've discovered.
- Yeah, so it's similar to you again, John.
(all laughing)
- That's so not true, so unfair.
- But yeah, and there were eight children in the house.
And he would get a swarm of them each to carry a canvas
and he'd trot off to the beach with all these children
and work on all the canvases at once.
- It sounds like chaos.
And actually, this element of his life
reminds me more of Dan Shriver in fact.
(all laughing)
- Too many kids.
- The next insult is level this way.
It's just the chaotic number of children,
because yes, he was quite poverty stricken for a long time.
- Yeah. - And then hit it.
(all laughing)
- But then the art dealer who sold his art,
who was Ernest Hoshaday,
he was also poverty stricken, went bankrupt,
so moved in with Monet, Ernest brought his wife,
and I believe there's six children.
- Six children, yeah.
- In with Monet and Monet's wife and their two children,
and then Monet fell in love with Ernest's wife,
and they're all, they can't pay rent,
and it just sounds like hell, God knows how he was putting
together these really peaceful, blissful paintings.
- Dear dad.
- Where am I in those things that's where I'm at?
- I imagine stepping into that household
would fill me with the same sense of anxiety
as like stepping into your house
on a normal Saturday afternoon.
- Fair call, fair call.
- We should say his gardens were unpopular
with a certain cohort, basically his neighbors, right?
Who were not fans,
'cause he subsumed everything to his art,
which went to the extent of him re-routing a local river
to feed his, his, yes, to feed his pond.
And so all the neighbors who needed the river
for their cattle farming and other things,
were like, well, this is our water.
And then they all panicked, 'cause they thought
the lilies would poison the water supply,
'cause they were foreign and exotic.
- They were.
- And, yeah.
- The lilies are really interesting,
because they had been invented very recently,
'cause all the lilies in France were white,
and there's a guy called Boris Latour Malliac,
who came up with the idea of crossing French lilies
with Japanese lilies,
and he kind of crossed two together
and came up with this new version,
and then he crossed that new version
with some from North America
to make all these different colors of lilies.
And actually, the in-between version of lily
that he made is now extinct,
so we can't make that bit of science that he did ever again,
because the in-between step has gone.
- Wow.
- But Monet's first order from this guy, we have it,
and he ordered a load of water lilies from him,
but he also ordered some water smart weed,
a horn nut, and some broad-leaved bog cotton.
So those paintings could have been paintings
of broad-leaved bog cotton,
if that had taken better than his water lilies.
- Yeah.
- The thing about him was that he was such
an incredibly determined person.
Renoir said, "If it wasn't for Monet,
"we'd have all given up,"
'cause he went on beyond the pain barrier all the time.
- They weren't massively late to the very start
where they'd be Impressionists.
- No, no, it was incredibly unpopular.
There were booed and laughed at.
- Yeah, the word Impressionism came as an insult.
It was one of Monet's paintings was called
Sunset and Impressionism.
- Impression Sunrise, yeah.
- Yeah, yeah, but then one of the critics
made some funny joke about it.
I haven't written it down already.
- All right, I have is, he was called Louis Leroy,
and one of his lines on Impression Sunrise was,
"Wallpaper in its original state
"is more finished than this seascape."
- Wow.
Oh my goodness.
- And then when the Impressionists became famous,
he then took all the credit for it.
He was very proud that he'd invented the name,
but he'd rubbish them at the time.
- Oh, really?
- Yeah, he was really rude about them.
And then the second time they did an exhibition,
it was described by a critic called Albert Wolfe
as a horrifying spectacle,
five or six lunatics, one of whom is a woman.
(all laughing)
And the woman he's talking about is Bertha Moriso,
and she's really interesting because she and her sisters
were learning to paint,
and they had a private tutor called Joseph Guichard,
and he won their mother,
considering the characters of your daughters,
they will become painters.
Do you realise what this means?
In the upper class milieu to which you belong,
this will be revolutionary,
I might say almost catastrophic.
The idea that one of these girls
might become a professional painter
was just seen as not an acceptable profession.
- Yeah, people said they have declared war on beauty.
That was the kind of idea of what they were doing.
And Zola said they shouldn't be called Impressionists,
they should be called actualists,
because that's what they were doing.
They were painting the actual thing.
Kind of like losing a beauty filter, I guess.
- They're not actually,
because if water lilies look like that,
then I think I've got something wrong with my eyesight.
It's blurry, aren't they painting their impression of it?
- I think you are used to seeing dusty water lilies.
(all laughing)
- 'Cause actually that painting that we named,
which was the Impression Sunrise,
I think he didn't have a name,
and he was gonna call it like Sunrise,
and someone said to him,
"Well, you can't really call it a Sunrise,
"because it doesn't really look like a Sunrise."
And he said, "Okay, we'll just put Impression Sunrise then."
And that's kind of eventually,
after the insult where Impressionists came from.
- Yeah, right.
- The thing about Monet is that he was famous
and immensely rich in his lifetime,
quite unlike Van Gogh, for example.
But you wouldn't forget that he was so,
it was such a disaster at the beginning.
So that exhibition that Louis Leroy commented on,
when all the figures came in,
the Impressionists found they each owed 184 francs
to the gallery.
- Wow.
- They actually lost money.
- It's like the Edinburgh Festival.
- Yeah, yeah.
- And so they had another go.
One of their few financial supporters decided
to hold a lottery in which the first prize was
one of Monet's friend Renoir's paintings.
And they had this lottery,
and a local servant girl won the big prize.
She didn't want the painting,
'cause she just heard everyone boo it,
so she got a cake.
- I don't know.
If you offered me a painting,
be it Impressionists or not, or a cake,
I know there are days when I'd go for the cake.
- Yeah.
- It's like a short termism, isn't it?
- Exactly, yeah.
'Cause you have to go to the trouble of selling the painting
in order to get the money to buy lots of cake,
if that's how you wanna do it.
- Yeah, good point.
- And it's quicker just to get the cake.
- Really good point.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
- The thing I love most about Monet,
and I didn't really know anything about
what he was painting.
I knew the water lilies,
but I didn't know about this garden.
And the maintenance of the garden
was so that he had the perfect thing to paint.
There was nothing left to the imagination.
So it wasn't even just the water lilies.
If trees that he were painting
suddenly came into bloom and foliage was there,
he'd hire gardeners to chop it away.
'Cause it's getting in the way
of what I had as the perfect painting.
- I've been to the garden.
- Have you?
- Yeah, it's just a garden with lots of tourists in it.
But it's like...
- It's weird, he always painted the tourists
out to the pictures, didn't he?
- But it was like, it was a Japanese garden.
That's what he called it, I think.
Or that's what he was aiming for, a Japanese garden.
'Cause it's got a Japanese bridge, like you say.
And there's now, if you go to Japan,
I can't remember which town it's in,
but there's like a replica of it
called the Monet Pond.
And so it's like, he copied the Japanese gardens
and now Japan has copied his garden
and called it the Monet Garden.
- That seems great.
So the garden itself didn't immediately become
a public place.
It was many years in the family.
And then the sun, when he passed away in 1966,
he handed it over and it became part of a museum
and then opened to the public.
And they've had these amazing gardeners
that have been working there ever since
to preserve as close as possible to what he had.
And so, as you said, James, they can't manufacture
some of the plants anymore because a step is missing.
And so they have to find alternatives.
But it's just, it's so wonderful reading the accounts
of how they go through all his letters.
They take the paintings and they hold them up
exactly in the spot at the right distance
and try and match the ponds to what is in the painting.
- So they're doing the exact same thing that he did,
but in reverse again. - In reverse, yeah.
- It's a really nice place to go.
It's almost like Disneyland, I would say.
It's quite fake, but it's like, it's really, really beautiful.
And it's definitely worth visiting.
- He was almost killed in 1865 while painting.
- Oh yeah?
- Yeah, a rogue discus knocked him out.
- No, I do it. - 1865, you see?
- Yeah, 1865. - Houseland.
- He was painting in the open
and there were a bunch of picnickers and some children.
And a discus suddenly caved to shot.
- Who brings a discus to a picnic?
- English tourists.
- That's amazing. - It says.
And so he ran to protect the kids,
but in doing so, it's kind of like a secret server sage
and jumping out of the president and taking the bullet.
He took the discus. - That's so funny.
- They say if it had hit him any higher,
it might have killed him, but it knocked him out
and he was bedridden for a while.
- So that exactly illustrates the QI principle, Dan,
because I have read an entire book on Monet,
a 300-page book on Monet, in great detail
to research this thing.
And I didn't know that thing about the discus.
- Really? - Yeah.
- And Dan got it from Buzzfeed to Top 10 Facebook.
(all laughing)
- Which impressionist are you most likely to be, Quiz?
(upbeat music)
- Okay, it is time for fact number two, and that is Anna.
- My fact this week is that Neolithic Europeans
regularly burn their houses down for no apparent reason.
- Wow. - That's amazing.
- It is unbelievable.
So this is a culture called the Cucuteni-Triplia culture.
Which is usually Neolithic cultures
that are sort of named often, at least,
on where the evidence of them is found.
And they lived in southeast in Europe,
in like Romania, Moldova, Ukraine,
that kind of area between about 5,100 BC and 2,800 BC
with lots of variation in how it's dated.
But the bizarre thing about them is,
from all the evidence we have, every 60 to 80 years,
they just burn down all their houses.
- So weird. - Yeah.
- And entire towns, really.
So a lot of people think they were like the first civilization
because they suddenly had these huge towns.
The settlement sizes increased by 20 times.
- They sometimes call them cities, don't they?
- Yes, yeah. - I think it's a slightly
optimistic. - How do you know it was them
burning them down rather than the neighbors
coming along the end of the week?
- Yeah, Anna, well, well, do I know,
I've done some extensive archaeology,
and I have learned a few things.
So a lot of people have said it might be that.
I think the reason they say it's not
is that it would have taken such a huge amount
of fuel to do it.
So a settlement of 100 houses would require
like four square miles of forest.
And also it's so regular.
It's this weird 60 to 80 cycle.
- There's a weird theory as well that they were actually
reinforcing the structures when they were burning it
because they found the walls actually hardened.
Just like, let's reset our houses.
Get everything out, let's burn the house down, and then--
- Well, almost like firing a pot.
- Exactly. - You know, you have your clay
and then you've set it on fire and it makes,
it becomes hard.
But I think I read one thing saying that might not be true
because eventually you would burn it
and it would become really, really hard.
And then if you wanted to build another house on it,
it just made it really difficult
because you can't put any foundations down
because you just can't drill into it.
Because in those days, they didn't have the tools for it.
- Yeah.
- One idea is that it might have been ceremonial
while they were burning these down, right?
- Yeah.
- Because if you look at Çatalhöyek in Turkey,
which is an area we've spoken about before,
which is like a really old town,
they did this as well.
And we can find out exactly how they did it.
And every time they would take all the goods out of the house,
then they would clean the house,
then they would put arrowheads on the floor,
and then the oven would be deliberately sort of knocked in
and broken down, and then they would set fire to it.
And it seems like they always set fire
from the south of the house, no matter when they did it.
So perhaps seeing as it was always the same
in this particular part of Turkey at least,
maybe there was a ceremonial reason behind it.
- Yeah, and it does seem to have happened
in a few other cultures as well.
So perhaps that was just the done thing.
They'd wonder why we don't burn our houses down.
- It's pretty amazing looking at drawings
of what these places, cities, if we use that term, look like,
'cause they were massive buildings.
And I don't place massive buildings to 5,000 BC.
- How massive are we talking, Dan?
- Well, okay. - Virgil Khalifa?
- Yeah, no, not that, but multi-story.
They would have multi-story.
And some places would be, if you can picture,
the example that's given is two entire basketball courts
would be the size of a place, and that, I don't know.
Maybe that's my ignorance of history.
- Certainly, if you had that in central London,
we're talking quite a few mills.
- Oh, definitely.
- So I couldn't find many examples of Neolithic housing,
but Jericho is interesting.
It's supposed to be the oldest city in the world.
Did you know that? - No.
- On the Palestinian West Bank.
And the Tower of Jericho is the oldest stone building
in the world, 8,000 years old.
- How interesting.
- And the Neolithic housing in Jericho,
they had the doors were in the roof.
Did you know that?
- Oh, so they would enter ladders.
- You had a ladder, you put a ladder up,
you went in through the door,
and there's a ladder inside to go down to the ground floor.
- That's super fun. - What was the good thing for that?
- Because of defence, the whole thing is,
what's fascinating about it, I had to look up,
remind myself, what Neolithic meant.
And as far as I can gather,
it basically starts with the invention of farming
about 12,000 years ago,
and ends with when bronze is invented about 4,300 years ago.
So it's about 8,000 years, so not that long.
But the first humans came to Britain around 700,000 BC.
So for 688,000 years,
human beings were just sitting about, eating fruit.
- Or wandering around. - Survive, yes.
- What they were sitting about, really, just walking.
- They were wandering, yeah. - Yeah, hunting, gathering.
- Yeah, and Neolithic basically describes the time
that humans became, I suppose, what we are, like, civilisation.
We settled, we found farming, we discovered farming,
and so we just started sitting there farming stuff.
Our diet's got much worse.
- Jared Diamond says it was the worst thing
that humans have ever done, doesn't he?
- Inventive farming. - Yeah, I think there's something
to be said for that, and everything moves terribly fast.
So 688,000 years doing nothing,
and then suddenly you got farming 12,000 years ago,
chickens domesticated 10,000 years ago,
roasted walnuts first eaten in France 8,000 years ago,
6,000 years ago, there were no white people then.
Everybody was dark-skinned.
And then the first known pair of shoes is 5,500 years ago,
so that's, you know... - Oh, my God.
- And, sorry, the game changer was the invention of the...
- Agriculture. - Agriculture is where we're talking about.
- Yeah, because everything follows in agriculture,
because first of all, you get a class system,
because somebody's got to be in charge,
somebody's got to decide things,
you get religion starts growing up,
and I think it's probably older than that.
- You start having grain, and so your teeth get bad,
- That's right. - everybody has terrible teeth.
- And then you've got property.
So people, there's defence, there's warfare,
there's, you know, what we call civilisation.
- But the problem, the real problem is,
it's basically Anna's short-termism of cake versus Renoir,
is that by farming, you can get lots of calories very easily,
so you don't have to work so hard to get your calories.
But it's really bad in the long term,
but it's really good in the short term.
- One of the unfun things about it
was that it introduced overwork, right?
So people have looked at the lives of hunter-gatherers,
and it was dreamy.
They were only working a few hours a day,
and then they would just be lying around in caves or whatever,
and it was with agriculture, where suddenly it became
all about production and production,
that people started working, their arse is off,
and we haven't come far since then.
- How was your month off?
So you just had...
- Yeah, they hadn't invented holidays and weekends yet, sure.
This particular culture were amazing, though.
The Cucuteni-Tripulia people.
I thought an extraordinary thing about them
is that there are lots of symbols on their pottery
that have been uncovered, they're completely well preserved,
and they include, and this is from, as I think I said,
like 5,000 BC, they include both yin and yang symbols,
so those perfect yin and yang symbols, and swastikas.
- And swastikas, yeah, I saw that as well.
- They seemed to have come up with both,
and I can't really find out.
- So they had Nazis.
- Yeah, it's very tense at the time.
That's why they kept burning each other's houses down.
- Isn't the swastika one of those sort of universal symbols
that's found all over the world, isn't it?
- What commonly people think it came from the East,
like, you know, in Indochina, yeah, in Hinduism,
but it seems to have come from here,
but I don't know if they did come about independently,
but it's quite a specific shape.
- Yeah, and I think what they're saying about this one is,
it's the earliest examples of consistent usage,
and so other places, they're quite sporadic,
and maybe just pull them through the--
- I kind of think it is a thing
that is quite a natural thing.
Like, if I'm just kind of sitting here,
sort of scribbling on a piece of paper,
sometimes I'll look down and I'll have drawn a swastika.
- It's really worrying when we see that change.
(all laughing)
- And I just think it's 'cause it's like a geometric figure,
it's just like a few crosses and whatever,
and you're like, "Oh, I'm gonna cross that out."
(all laughing)
- Do write in anyone if you have the same thing as me.
I can't say I find myself so consciously
drawing swastikas.
- Well, it's a sour sticker as well, isn't it?
It's a--
- That's a back to front one, is it?
That's what James always tells people.
(all laughing)
Don't worry.
- There's an interesting guy.
Did you come across Sir John Lubbock in your--
- No.
- So he was the guy who coined the word Neolithic.
And Paleolithic, actually.
Extraordinary guy, I never heard of him before.
Amazing scientist.
And when he was about 12, his father came home and said,
"I've got some very good news, Johnny.
"Very, very good news."
And he thought, "Oh, I'm getting a new pony."
But it was actually the idea that Charles Darwin
was gonna come and live in the next village.
So--
- Oh, really?
- So they became very close friends.
And Lubbock was the guy who persuaded the Dean of Westminster
that Darwin should be buried in Westminster Abbey.
- Really?
- And was one of his pool barris.
I thought that was rather charming.
- Really?
That's very interesting because in a weird mirroring
of that, a couple of generations later,
the person who came up with the term Neolithic Revolution
was an Australian called Veer Gordon Child.
And he was very good friends with another Charles Darwin,
the grandson of Charles Darwin.
- Oh, really?
- And they both heavily influenced each other as well.
And he was a very interesting child.
He was a person who excavated Scarabray,
which is an extraordinary--
- Oh, where they found the village.
They found it, yeah.
- Yes, yeah.
- That's kind of the oldest Neolithic village in the UK, right?
- One of the Orkneys, isn't it?
- Yeah, it's in Orkney.
And it is, I have actually been there.
And it's an amazing place because it's so well preserved.
And it's about nine houses.
And they're 1,000 years older than Stonehenge.
And they're all still furnished.
It was all stone furniture
'cause famously not really any trees on Orkney.
So everything was stone.
And they have, as you walk in through the doorway,
you've got a fire in the middle.
You've got a chest of drawers opposite.
And you've got two beds on either side.
- What were the chest of drawers made of?
- I was going to say that stone chest of drawers.
That's pretty cool.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, I've used chest of drawers.
It's a place where you put your stuff.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Yeah, you've done the estate agent.
(all laughing)
- Exactly.
It looks like a rock, but if used correctly.
- Imagine this rock.
It could be your office.
It could be an exercise room.
- And they also all had limpets soaking tanks.
That's the other group that they furnished with.
- It could be an exercise room.
It could be a limpets soaking tank.
(all laughing)
- Whatever you're into.
- What do you, I mean,
obviously the answer is to soak your limpets.
But what is a limpets soaking tank for?
- Apparently, as you've correctly assumed,
it is for limpets soaking.
And the reason they limpets soaked was not,
as you might think, 'cause they ate limpets.
- Yeah, that's right.
- We believe they use limpets as bait.
And if it soaked them, they would soften a bit
and be better bait.
And then they tracked other things.
- There's another theory, by the way,
just jumping back to these,
the Burnt House horizon as it's been coined.
- Oh, the Trigelian ones.
- Yeah, exactly.
There are many theories as to why they were Burnt.
We've already mentioned a few.
One other theory is that--
- I can just hear it sometimes when Dan
is coming up with a time-traveler-y alien-y.
That's what it's gonna be today.
- It's not any of that.
- Go on.
- So there's a theory that Bigfoot was--
(all laughing)
What it is, is that it's thought that if someone died
in the house, then the house has gone
from a house of the living to the house of the dead.
And so you burn it down to respect the dead.
I mean, there's so many--
- That's a rational theory, actually.
I take it back, Dan.
No Bigfoot involved.
- Talking of spooky mysteries,
shouldn't we talk about Stonehenge a bit?
Because that is really one of the big mysteries in that.
That's sort of late Neolithic, isn't it?
What's it about?
Between 3,100 and 1,600 B.C.
- Yeah.
- 1,500 years, it took them to fish.
- I think it was late Neolithic for the world,
but we were actually quite slow to farm in Britain,
weren't we?
- Yeah, so yes, we were.
Everything took, you know, it took thousands of years
to reach farming for the least.
- Well, you know, it's just like a European thing, isn't it?
We don't really like to do that.
(laughing)
- They recently, they think, almost certainly,
that Stonehenge was built by the Welsh.
Did you know this?
- Hmm.
- They knew the stones came from Priselli Hills in Wales.
But they assumed that the English went there,
collected the stones and brought them back in.
But now they think the thing was actually built in Wales.
- Hang on, so it built in Wales
and then they did an Ikea style,
took it down and shipped it over.
- Yes, absolutely.
- Wow.
- I went to Stonehenge.
Like, there was a thing where you could go like early
in the morning before it opened for the tourists.
And we did that and they do not like it
if you touch the stones.
- Hmm.
- That's just a tip.
- Did you touch it?
- No.
(laughing)
- It could have done when I was a child,
you definitely couldn't touch it.
- I know, well, you used to be able to, right?
Like, you used to even be able to chip bits off them,
I think we might have said, but yeah.
- How did they feel when you scratched
that swastika on here?
(laughing)
- I love that story, then in 1915,
a wealthy barrister called Sir Cecil Chubb,
he went to an auction in Salisbury
intending to buy a pair of curtains at a knockdown price
and ended up buying Stonehenge.
(laughing)
- Darling, don't be angry.
- This reminds me, John, of that time
that you bought the life-size Barbie doll.
- The Christmas tree Barbie for my daughters, yeah.
(laughing)
It was a Save the Children auction.
And I was directing ads at the time,
we had plenty of spare money,
and I bought this seven-foot tall Barbie
dressed as a Christmas tree for the girls.
And Sarah came back from the loo,
I just bought this thing, she was so angry,
she'd speak to me for three months.
(laughing)
- You should have been like, it could have been worse,
it could have been Stonehenge, yeah.
(laughing)
- It could have been, because similarly,
Cecil Chubb bought this thing,
he came home so dulling and he told his wife
that he'd bought it as a birthday present for her.
- Right.
- He was improvising, but she didn't want it.
He said, "Well, what the hell do I want those for?
"Where's my--"
- They're not gonna keep the light out?
(laughing)
- So that's how it gave it to the nation in 1918.
He gave it to it. - Wow.
That's great.
- Now, whatever happened to the curtains,
that's what I wanted to do. - Exactly, that's the question.
- Yeah.
(upbeat music)
- Okay, it is time for fact number three,
and that is my fact.
My fact this week is that despite warning us
that everything we say would be recorded,
we have lost all the recordings of everything
that George Orwell said.
- Ironic.
- Yeah.
- All right, I'll add as far as that.
- There's nothing on YouTube at all, no clips.
- There's literally nothing.
He was a BBC broadcaster.
He was famous in his day, obviously, as a writer.
- Of course he was, yeah.
- Yeah, he did multiple, multiple panels.
He was always on broadcast,
so we should have his voice somewhere.
- This is, thank God Alex Bell is not on this podcast,
'cause he gets very upset
about the BBC's cataloging system.
- And you can understand it when you hear things like this.
- Yeah, yeah, exactly.
And actually we have no video of him as well,
except in 2003, some footage of him was unearthed of him.
When he was, I believe he was 18 years old.
You see him at a school sort of like sports field,
and he's the fourth kid in a line of kids
who are holding arms linked up.
And that's the only footage that we have of him
before he was actually famous.
So we don't have any footage.
We got photos, obviously.
And he was someone who was being monitored as well,
because he was saying a lot of contentious stuff.
So you figure just something would have survived.
- Yeah, and it's such a shame it hasn't,
because I think his voice would have been hilarious.
- It sounds like it was, yeah.
- Well, 'cause he was super posh.
And you know how when you watch old films,
like Brief Encounter, about kind of not even
that posh people, and they all were at 12,
you can barely understand them?
And George Orwell at the time, even his posh friend said,
"This guy sounds incredibly posh."
So I think he would have been virtually
incomprehensible to us.
- Yeah, there's quite a few people
who described what his voice was like.
And something to take into account
is the fact that when he was a soldier in the Spanish War,
he was literally shot through the neck.
Like a bullet went in one side and out the back.
It somehow missed all the main arteries
that would have killed him.
He survived, but that affected his voice forever on.
In terms of volume, so he could never talk loud.
It was hugely exhausting.
He'd been at dinner parties and he'd try to say something.
And everyone's like, "What?"
And he's just like, "Ugh."
And he just couldn't get the volume right enough.
- Do you think maybe we do have some recordings of him,
but it's just very badly leveled?
- Yeah, exactly.
- I did not read somewhere that a BBC researcher intervened,
said he sounded like Alan Rickman.
- Alan Rickman, yeah, that's what they said.
Yeah, 'cause so the thought is there is one bit of audio
of him out there, 'cause it's this BBC researcher
who found it in the archives, but then kind of lost it.
And one day we will get it.
These things do turn up.
- Yeah, well, that's very exciting.
In a way, this actually is a fitting fact,
because he actually said in 1984
that every record is destroyed, right?
It was like the end of history.
- He did actually.
- So this is like history has been wiped out.
Winston Smith says everything had been destroyed or falsified.
So now all we need is for an Alan Rickman
to come along and like fake his voice
and create that as the new tree.
- Yeah, yeah.
- And then you put his prediction.
- He also used to fake his voice,
which was really interesting,
when he was living in various guises during his life.
So one of his most famous books,
Down and Out in Paris in London,
so he decided he wanted to live as someone on the streets
and sort of put himself into the real people's world.
And he would put on, apparently,
a sort of cockney accent that he would sort of...
- Yeah, well, you wouldn't say that, right?
If he's talking like Jacob Rees-Mogg,
he's not gonna like work out well in Paris
with the criminals, is he?
- Yeah, that's true, that's true.
- I've got some ironic facts about 1984,
'cause I love the core fact.
Within 200 yards of the flat in Islington,
where Orwell had the idea for 1984,
there are now 32 CCTV cameras.
- That's very good.
- And the most common book people lie about having read
is Orwell's 1984.
- Yeah, yeah.
- Why would they do that?
- Well, James, you used to...
- You used to lie a lot, didn't you?
- But in our live fish shows,
you had a thing about people with the top 10 books
that people lied about and Tolstoy was on there.
- Yeah, but 1984 is the top one.
I've heard that before, yeah, yeah.
- No one's lying about, you know, J.K. Rowling, are they?
No one's lying about having read the Chamber of Seekers.
- Do you know what I think it is?
I think it's quite easy to lie about,
'cause Big Brother as a concept is quite easy to understand.
Room 101 is quite easy to understand.
If people say, "Have you read it?"
you can kind of get away with it, I think.
- Maybe you sort of think you have.
In Thailand, you know you can be arrested in Thailand
for reading 1984.
- Really?
- And for having picnics.
Those are the two really serious things in Thailand.
- What was the second one, sorry?
- Having picnics.
- Oh, gosh.
- I thought you said, I slightly myself,
thought you said at-family picnics.
You could only be arrested for reading it
if you had really at-family picnics.
It's very rude and you should be interacting.
- It's interesting you said about where he got the idea
was in Islington.
I think he's partly got the idea from his wife,
Eileen, who'd already written and published a poem
about 1984, 15 years earlier.
- Really?
- Yeah, yeah.
- Cool.
- About 1984, the year, like her predictions.
- Yeah, yeah, exactly.
Now hers was a bit more optimistic.
It was about that the world was sort of sought itself out
and she thought the knowledge of the past
can't be wiped out.
So 1984 that he wrote was almost the opposite
of what she wrote.
- Right.
- Her one was written in 1934.
So it was exactly 50 years behind.
And she, yeah, wrote about what the future would be like.
- And she thought it would be great.
Well, she's saying-
- Yeah, kind of.
- You know, things might go downhill,
things might be a bit bad,
but in the end, everything will work itself out.
- Really?
- Yeah, yeah.
And he also based it on a Soviet book called "Mui",
which was written by Yefgeny Zamyatin.
- Yes.
- Which is basically the same story.
- Is it?
- Well, kind of.
It's like, it's all about mass surveillance
and stuff like that.
And it was banned by the Soviet Union,
but Orwell read it.
And he did say that his next book would be similar
to this "Mui".
- Fair enough.
- Sure enough it was.
So he kind of, I wouldn't say plagiarized it
'cause he put lots of his own ideas in.
- But I think like if you take his wife's poem about 1984
and this Soviet book and put them together,
it wasn't a huge leap to come up
with what he came up with.
- Yeah.
I read "1984" when I was at school.
- Well, so you claim.
- Oh yeah, yeah, big brother and the rooms,
101 rooms and something, yeah.
(laughing)
But it absolutely altered my life.
I do remember it being a game changer.
And then the other book, they changed my view of things.
And it was part of the module we were doing at school
was "Brave New World" by Aldous, hopefully.
- Yeah, definitely, me too.
- Those two were always paired together
as these kind of dystopian books.
So it was the most joyous thing to discover
that Orwell studied under Huxley at school.
- Oh yeah.
- Had eaten.
He taught him French.
- Yes.
- I mean, that is just incredible.
And Huxley wasn't an author yet.
He wasn't, well, he certainly wasn't published and famous.
So these were just two guys who would go on
to change the world.
- It was a delight, isn't it?
It's an echo of the impressionists really
because not just that extraordinary co-incidence,
but Orwell was a contemporary at Eaton
of Cyril Connolly, Anthony Powell, and Ian Fleming.
They were all contemporaries.
So it's like a sort of nexus,
like the fact that Renoir and Emile Zola and Baudelaire
and people all famous were just young people in Paris.
- Who would have thought it would turn out?
- I know, just successful people.
- Just kind of help when you're of extremely rich,
posh, white people.
- Although to be fair to Orwell, yeah, it wasn't,
you know, he sort of got a scholarship or something,
didn't he?
- He did.
His mother was, she had a really exotic name.
She was called Ida Limousane.
She was born in Penge.
- That's where I used to live.
- Yeah.
- Wow, cool.
- Well, I was actually just saying
that Penge is not a very exotic sounding place.
- It's not.
And they tried to change that in Penge
by calling it 'Ponge'.
(all laughing)
I'd get genuinely.
- They did.
- Genuinely, yeah.
- I live in Ponge.
- But to be fair, she was only on holiday in Ponge.
- Right.
- She was actually grew up in More Lameen in Myanmar.
- On 1984, the process of writing it sounds really horrible.
Fun though it is to read.
He was really sick, wasn't he?
So he had terrible TB
and he went to the Island of Jura,
very, very remote spot on the Scottish Island of Jura
to write 1984 after he'd been widowed.
Apostle Eileen had died very unexpectedly.
And so very sad time.
He'd taken the sun, he'd just adopted.
I think they adopted a son about six months before she died.
So he took the sun, went to Jura,
and it just sounds like agony.
And he'd write that TB was gradually killing him
as he forced out this awful book.
But he's, again, he sounds a little bit like Monet
so determined and kind of gutsy.
So he did things like once a bunch of cousins came to visit
and he took them all on this fishing trip.
And, you know, he's got a bad TB.
The boat capsized, they really nearly drowned.
I think he just managed to scramble him and his son to a rock
and drag them out.
So every nearly died, but made his TB a bit worse.
But, yeah, it sounds like he's really living the awful life
that they lived in 1984, at least suffering-wise.
Yeah, because he had TB all his life, didn't he?
Suffered it from all the time.
Very sickly.
But, again, like Monet, incredibly determined,
you know, going to the Spanish Civil War as a reporter
and then joining up on the socialist side.
And then in the Second World War,
he really tried to get into the Army,
but they wouldn't let him because of his TB.
In fact, one friend said he tried harder to get into the Army
than most people tried to get out of it.
And so, instead, he joined the Home Guard famously, you know,
because he thought that once Hitler had been defeated,
it might be transformed into a Catalan-style,
revolutionary militia to overthrow the British ruling classes.
Wow. The Home Guard were going to have a coup.
Considering he was so anti-fascist,
he did have a Hitler mustache when he was young.
Yes. But he was also an anti-communist.
Did you know that? Yeah, he was.
Because he hated the communists,
having met them, the Russians in the Spanish Civil War,
April they were. He was a socialist,
but he didn't like the communists. Yes, that's right.
So he kept a list. Well, I always thought 1984 was about
how communism had gone wrong a bit, wasn't it?
Yeah. I think. Anyway, good one, sorry.
He kept a sort of McCarthyite list of people
who were communists or fellow travellers,
which he then, just before he died,
he gave it to the Foreign Office.
That's right. Did he? Yes, that's right.
A dog, sneaky dogger.
He was kept secret for 54 years,
and on that list are J.B. Priestley, Michael Redgrave,
the actor, and Charlie Chaplin.
Are we sure he didn't just not like these people?
Maybe, yeah, maybe. Yeah?
He also is responsible for weather spoons.
Yes, I read that. Oh, yes.
You've forgotten this essay on the perfect pub, didn't you?
He wrote his essay on a perfect pub, and he said...
And it's called "Moon on the Water" or something?
The Moon on the Water, yeah.
There is a weather spoon, so it's called that, I think, isn't it?
There's a lot, actually. There's a lot.
He's won a pinch. He said that...
Do you want to punish me? Sorry.
He said that it should have a very convenient location.
It should have a very good atmosphere without any loud music
so you can chat to each other.
There should be fights every Saturday night.
No, he didn't say that one.
He said that you should be able to get a variety of different beverages,
including non-alcoholic ones.
But then, having said that, some of his friends said
that whenever he went to the pub with them,
he would only allow them to drink dark ale no matter what they ordered.
They would say, "Oh, I'll have a gin and tonic."
And then he'd come back from the pub with some dark ale
and say, "Well, that's what you're having."
I'll gather around. What are you? What are you having?
Jimmy's on, I think? Yeah, what are you having?
Roman Coke? Yeah, go ahead.
Oh, don't let George get it in.
Oh, George, yeah.
12 dark ales, please.
They're like a crisps now.
He did say, "This is what of him reminds me of you, John."
Which is... No.
He belitt... This was according to the ODMB.
He believed that no meaningful idea was too difficult
to be explained in simple terms to ordinary people,
which is basically the QI style of writing, isn't it?
I think that's very true. I think he's a very QI person, actually,
because here's one.
To see what is in front of one's nose requires constant struggle.
That's very QI, I think.
There are some ideas so wrong
that only a very intelligent person could believe in them.
That's great.
So, John, I wonder if you have any insight into this,
but Orwell historians have claimed that they believe Room 101
was based off his experience at the BBC
and being in such torturous conference rooms and meetings.
Really, he went to the Spanish Civil War,
suffered from TB the years of his life's struggle,
lived down in Paris and London, but working at the BBC.
Yeah.
This is really interesting. Down and out since Studio One.
There's a particular echo for this to me,
because I used to have the next-door office, Douglas Adams,
where we were both young radio producers,
and we looked across at Broadcasting House, but the back of it.
OK. From 16 Langham Street.
And there was a window in there that was all blacked out,
and we thought that must be Room 101 in there.
We fantasised about all this,
and we were going to write a story about how the BBC had a coup in London,
because you remember how weird things were in the '70s,
the three-day week, and the Labour government empowered everyone,
and thought it was going to be a sort of counter-revolution.
I think James would have stretched my mind to remember that
if he remembers the first six months of his life.
But other than that, no.
I didn't even do three days' work in those days.
But wait, so what?
It felt like Big Brother was happening, Big Auntie.
Yes, but we thought there was going to be some sort of counter-revolution.
Right.
And the idea was the BBC were going to lead this from this secret room,
and they're basically going to take down all the telephone lines
and done it as a drama.
They've cut tanks in Trafalgar Square.
It was all a completely faked coup, where nothing had to be taken.
But we thought it had, so they all stayed home.
Right.
As it was, the blacked-out window was just David Attenborough's dressing room.
The spookiness goes on, because about that age,
I was 24 or something like that,
I had a call from a very senior BBC executive.
He had a strange voice like that. It was very ha-ha.
And asked if I'd like to go to dinner.
So I went to my head of department,
just having come out of an English public school,
that a man 30 years old of me had asked me to dinner.
I said, "Do you think this is all right?"
He said, "We'll be very careful what you say.
"That's the managing director's hitman."
I thought, "What?"
Because it was well-known that everybody in BBC had a file on them,
and if you were a communist at a Christmas tree in the corner,
if you were a lefty.
So I went out for dinner with this bloke,
and I had too much to drink before I was terribly nervous
that I was going to say something wrong.
And he would say, "Do you like football?"
And I go, "Not really, do you?"
"No, do you enjoy opera?"
And I say, "Not really, do you enjoy it?"
So it was a very uncomfortable dinner.
And I went home and nothing happened.
And years later, I was told that the guy had started Channel 4,
and I told him this story.
He said, "Oh, that was...
"You were definitely being recruited for MI5, and you blew it."
If only you said you supported Wolves, happily.
That was the key.
So I was actually being recruited for the Secret Service,
and I didn't realise it.
Wow!
But Blackadder wouldn't have existed if you had been.
So, you know, what's better
that you ended the Cold War ten years early, or...?
If you had been recruited, you wouldn't tell us.
You might tell us the story, and then it might end with,
"And then I was never recruited."
Mm-hmm.
(LAUGHS)
That's...
Dun-dun-dun.
(ELECTRONIC MUSIC)
OK, it is time for our final fact of the show,
and that is James.
OK, my fact this week is that in 14th century London,
one punishment for selling unclean spices
was to be put in the pillory
and have the spices set on fire beneath your nose.
(LAUGHS)
What would that do? Like, do we know how it would matter?
'Cause it sounds like you'd be quite nice.
Is it like one of those scented sticks you get in your house sometimes
that releases a nice smell?
No, no. Have you ever seen on the internet
when they do, like, the Nutmeg challenge,
or the Cinnamon challenge, or whatever it is,
and they try and eat one spoonful of spices,
and it all goes terribly wrong?
Yeah. I reckon it's that times a thousand.
Yeah. You're just going to get it in your sinuses,
in your eyes as... It would burn like a thousand.
It would burn like mad in your face. Yeah, it would be awful.
So, I read this when I was trying to nail something
about eating fish on a Friday for QI this year.
I reckon that people in the UK eat fish on a Friday
for economic reasons, not for religious reasons.
I can't work out if that's true, so if you know this,
if you're a historian, you know this, get in touch with me.
But while I was doing that research,
I found a paper called Butchering in Medieval London
by Ernest L. Sabine, and I read that,
and he gave loads of good info about the food trade
in the 14th century.
And in 1393, when John Hadley was the mayor,
he was a grocer, he came up with this new law.
You said when John Hadley was the mayor like...
Do you remember when John Hadley was the mayor in 1393?
You must remember that. The John Hadley era, of course.
Hadley years. Yeah. Sorry, go on.
So, he was a grocer, as we all know,
and obviously had lots of ideas about the grossing trade.
I mean, I'm telling a lot of people what they already know here,
but I'm going to go through the basics.
He came up with a law about adulterated spices
and said that basically you should be not selling spice
which isn't pure, and there was one particular guy,
a foreign merchant, who had come over to London
and was selling dodgy spices,
and he was sent to the pillory and had his false powders
burned underneath him. Wow.
And that pillory, by the way, is where you put your head in...
It's like stocks, in a way. It's like stocks.
Yeah, people might throw tomatoes at you,
but in this case, he was being burned.
Yeah, the stocks are different, because the stocks are just your feet.
They're better because you can dodge the missiles,
because you can move, you're upper body.
Yeah, yeah. You're doomed with the pillory.
And Hadley, as well, he prescribed that all spices
must henceforth be garbled by an official garbola.
Oh! Oh, that's wrong!
Oh! Oh, my God!
Pum-pum-pum.
So, garbola. Do you want to do it all?
LAUGHTER
Imagine. So, I didn't know what this was, garbling.
So, a garbling is where you sift through a spice
to get rid of all the stuff that isn't a spice.
Oh! So, let's say you've got a load of peppercorns,
but there's loads of, like, little ant legs
and little bits of flies and stuff in there.
You sift through it, and you just get the good stuff,
and that's garbling.
And it comes from an old Anglo-Norman word "garbolae" meaning "to sift".
And the garbling that you were doing, Anna,
comes from an old thing where you would get a text
and you would take out all of the bits that you don't want to say,
and you would just include the bits that you do want to say.
So, let's say you took something from the Bible.
You might say, "Well, actually, I quite like the adultery part,
"so I'm not going to mention that, but I will mention the stuff
"about not coveting my neighbour's ox."
And that was known as garbling because you were sifting through the words.
And then it eventually became like "garbling your voice" and "garbling your voice".
So, it's almost become the opposite,
because now, garbling is more like including extraneous stuff.
It's certainly not the direct kind of communication that...
Exactly. Yeah.
Weird.
This seems to be a bit of a theme,
this means of punishment for adulterating spices.
I actually read that in 1444, in Nuremberg,
an adulterator of saffron was burned at the stake over a fire of his own saffron.
Yeah. Wow.
It's been an incredibly expensive fire.
Yeah.
Yes, it's the most expensive spire saffron, I think, isn't it?
Yeah, it is, because you can only get it a tiny bit from each saffron flower, can't you?
So, you have to get, like, 200,000 saffron flowers.
And then you can't taste it anywhere, guys.
They used to. Yeah, might win a huge time, right, guys?
Yeah, exactly, yeah.
This was the saffron shell code, wasn't it, in Nuremberg, about saffron.
Sounds like it.
And you could be hung drawn and quartered for selling dodgy saffron.
Really?
They were really hard on saffron, I guess, because it is so pricey.
Yeah, but if you were a woman, you wouldn't be hung drawn and quartered,
because it was seen as bad to hang draw and quarter women,
because you might be able to see their belly
as you're pulling out the innards.
Maybe someone might get turned on by that, I don't know.
But you weren't allowed to show someone a woman's stomach,
so you couldn't hang draw and quarter someone,
and so they would be buried alive instead.
It had a special kind of pillory for women,
did you know that? No?
A few, T-H-E-W-E, which is a...
Is it with beef holes?
...stocks, and it was just...
Sorry, it was the stocks that kept the legs together.
Oh, really?
Really.
Fascinating.
So funny.
And I thought this is like... Really interesting.
There's a company called Spices Pillory in Nantwich, Cheshire.
Yeah, I just couldn't believe that.
It's now just called Spices, it's now just called Spices,
but it's in 38 Pillory Street, Nantwich.
Really? That is so funny.
And so I was just checking this out on Wikipedia,
and it says on the pillory entry
that people who were put in pillories were called "pillocks."
Citation-needed Wikipedia, I think.
It does say "pillock-needed."
That's never going to last.
I think "pillock" comes from "bollock," basically, doesn't it?
Yeah, I think.
So do you think that people with the spices burning under the nose
were also pelted with fruit and things?
Oh, I would think so, yeah.
'Cause one of the things I liked about the pillory
was that it was kind of quite a democratic thing,
so the crowd decided what they threw.
So if it was a minor offence, you'd get soft fruit or whatever,
and if they really didn't like it, if you'd done something horrible,
they'd throw stones and saucepans,
and people were actually killed in the pillory.
Dead dogs and stuff like that. Dead dogs, yeah. Really?
There was one guy who, in 1727, was convicted of attempted sodomy.
He's called Charles Hitchin,
and he went into the stocks wearing a suit of armour
'cause he was so worried that people would throw heavy, hard things at him.
That's amazing. And did you read about Daniel Defoe,
the guy who wrote "Robinson Crusoe"? Yeah.
He did a satirical pamphlet,
which somebody took literally,
and he was put in the pillory for seditious libel,
which is a really serious political offence.
And the crowd all turned up, and they thought he was absolutely great,
so they just threw flowers at him.
Oh, nice. Yeah, that's cool. Yeah, that's very cool.
It's really interesting, this is a punishment that fits the crime, I suppose,
which quite often happened in the olden days.
So, in 1482, in Bebrick, which I think was a village in Germany,
there was a vintner who'd adulterated his wine with something else,
and he was condemned to drink six quarts of it, of his own wine,
which is six litres. That is a lot.
It's a lot... Well, the article about it, which was written in 1952,
just said, "From this, he died."
Oh, wow.
What a way to go. Yeah.
That's so interesting.
People think, you know, you sort of think,
"Oh, that's the sort of thing they did in the Middle Ages."
They cheat it by making... Instead of saffron, they did turmeric.
But it still goes on today, adulteration of spices.
Mm, yeah. And I'm just reading in Tata, the big Indian multinational,
the insurance branch, has a thing on that,
of typical adulteration of spices in India,
such as you put sand or powdered chalk in sugar,
brick powder is added to red chilli powder,
pire seeds to black pepper, chicory to coffee,
sawdust to ground cumin seeds,
and used tea leaves to tea.
So that's how they do it.
And in the... I don't like that one.
They also put mud, stones, pebbles, marbles and filth, apparently,
in some spices.
Marbles are never going to fit through those tiny holes.
The rules from the US Food and Drug Administration
on filth in adulterated spices are really specific.
So, for example, the maximum amount of filth permitted by the FDA
in 50 grams of ground paprika
is 150 insect fragments and 22 rodent hairs.
In all spices, 300 insect fragments and 10 rodent hairs.
Somebody checks all these.
And in cinnamon, it's 400 insect fragments and 11 rodent hairs.
What you really want to get into if you're a food adulterer
is canned or frozen spinach,
because they're much more generous with their limits there.
So, for every 100 grams of canned or frozen spinach,
you're allowed 50 aphids and/or thrips and/or mites for 100 grams,
or two or more, three millimetre or longer larvae
or larval fragments, or spinach worms,
whose aggregate length exceeds 12 millilitres per 24 pounds.
That's how much spinach...
You get a lot of mites, mites and thrips in there.
Spinach is very light, though, isn't it?
Yeah. Like, how many kilos of spinach was it?
That was 100 grams. Oh, yeah, OK, that's quite a lot of ant.
The most adulterated spice/herb in the EU,
according to a 2022 reporter's oregano or oregano, if you're American.
It's the most adulterated? Yeah, it is.
48% of samples that were checked were contaminated with...
Oh, um... sage.
Sage, I think you'd be able to taste that.
Do you think? If there's some of us to say... Time? No.
Marijuana.
Grass. No, it is olive leaves.
So, they just basically add olive leaves to the oregano leaves
and then mush it up.
I mean, if you're not noticing, sod it.
You know, people can even taste herbs and spices anyway.
They're just for show, aren't they?
Like, there was this huge thing.
They're just to make your covers look fancy.
Just get some ketchup and mayonnaise and stop being such a snob.
No, there was this just...
I'm just saying this because there was a big sting in 2021
of a criminal gang in Spain.
Oh, I thought that was something they found in some spinach.
How much of a bee is there, Stings?
Just the sting, it's fine.
Yeah, add spice as it goes down.
No, this was... 2021, there was a criminal gang in Spain
that was done for making fake saffron.
So, Spanish saffron is the incredibly expensive
sort after saffron.
And there were 17 people arrested,
and it was found that a huge proportion of it was actually fake,
so it was mixed up with other stuff. Yeah.
But mostly mixed up with Iranian saffron,
which had been imported, feels OK,
and which I think does taste the same.
I'd be amazed if people could tell the difference.
So, there was one Parisian chef who said that making sure
you've got legitimate saffron is as time-consuming
as checking all the other produce in your food combined.
And I would say, don't worry about it.
No, I don't think I'm going to go to a restaurant and go,
"This is Iranian saffron!"
Wow, that's amazing.
Bread is one that was adulterated a lot in history, wasn't there?
And you could be really badly punished for being a baker and...
Hence, bakers doesn't, I guess.
Yes, so the idea you make a 13th bun
so that the weight of your 12 buns is...
Is actually... So, it was like, yeah, for non-English,
because exactly you make a 13th bun,
and that's what bakers doesn't, as opposed to 12,
because you're in so much trouble if you'd made 12 buns,
but they were just a little bit light.
It's like, to be safe, chuck another one.
But it's a serious matter, because bread is what people live on,
and, you know, you can't cheat on that.
Whereas in 2017, I think it was,
they censured a Massachusetts bakery for listing love
as an ingredient of their granola.
They said, "Made with love," and they took them to court.
I think that's fair enough.
Me too. I hope they got life sentences.
Chuck a dog at them.
So, just on baking, as well, in the 18th century in Turkey,
if you undersold your bread, you would get in trouble,
and you might get hanged.
And that was common enough that if you were a master baker...
I said master baker. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
You might employ an assistant who got more wages,
but they were the one who would take the fall if you got in trouble.
Right. Tense, isn't it?
Yeah, would you take that job?
Worthy extra money.
I'd be more concerned if I saw a master baker list love
as part of the ingredient.
OK, that's it. That is all of our facts.
Thank you so much for listening.
If you'd like to get in contact with any of us
about the things that we have said over the course of this podcast,
we can all be found on various social media accounts.
I'm on Instagram with @Shrieberland, James.
I'm on Instagram, no such thing as James Harkin.
John. I'm on Instagram, John Lloyd QI.
That's right. And Anna.
You can get in touch with the podcast as a whole
by emailing podcast@QI.com or tweeting @NoSuchThing.
Yep, that's right. Or you can go to our website,
nosuchthingasafish.com.
All of our previous episodes are up there.
There's a link to Club Fish,
which is the private members club of our podcast,
and there's also lots of bits of merch and so on.
Do check it out or just come back here for another episode.
We'll be back again next week.
We'll see you then. Goodbye.
I just like to draw geometric figures on bits of paper.
That's my doodles are always geometric figures.
And OK, I need to explain yourself to her.
Explain yourself at Nuremberg.
(laughing)
(laughs)